What comes to your mind
when you hear the word “dishonesty”?
Maybe you think of Satan,
“the father of the lie.”
Or Ananias and his wife come to your mind.
They lost their lives because of lying.
We do not want to imitate such ones.
We avoid lying.
Is that, though, as far as our honesty goes?
Our holy God, Jehovah,
wants us to be holy as well,
and that is why he urged
the ancient Israelites
not to deceive others
as mentioned at Leviticus 19:11.
Does this not add some color to honesty?
Dishonesty includes
(and please take note of this definition)
intentionally leading someone
to a wrong conclusion.
For example, by twisting the truth
or by providing only certain details,
we endanger our peace with others.
Why can we say so?
How does dishonesty wreck peace?
Peace and a peaceful relationship
are built on trust.
Trusting someone makes you feel
safe and secure
and puts you at ease.
There is no peace without trust.
How do we develop trust?
Trust is the result
of spending time together,
speaking the truth with one another.
We trust people who act unselfishly
and do not use “crooked speech,”
as the Bible puts it.
If someone deceives us only once
or is dishonest in another way,
we might start to question
everything they say.
One single act of dishonesty may be enough.
It can ruin their reputation.
As bad as this is,
dishonesty has the potential
to create even greater damage.
Dishonesty can be compared
with a highly contagious virus.
Dishonesty breeds dishonesty.
People who have contact
with deceitful, dishonest persons
are in danger of being infected.
Dishonesty might not only wreck
one relationship
but multiple relationships,
putting the unity and peace
of the whole group at risk.
This reminds us of the relationship
between Laban and Jacob
in the Bible book of Genesis.
Based on the agreement with Laban,
Jacob worked hard for seven years
in order to marry Laban’s daughter Rachel.
And despite this high price
that Jacob had to pay,
those years seemed for him
just like “a few days.”
Sadly, instead of Rachel,
he received the older daughter, Leah,
as a wife.
So now Leah was also part of the deception.
What was the result after Jacob had found out
that Laban tricked him?
The trust was gone.
The relationship had suffered
to a great degree.
Dishonesty wrecked the peace
in those relationships,
and so the following seven years
of work for Rachel were bitter.
And Laban’s dishonesty emboldened him
to continue in his course.
He unfairly changed Jacob’s wages ten times.
He deceived Jacob.
Because of Laban’s dishonesty,
the peace in the whole family
was disrupted.
Let us now continue to watch
the next segment of the dramatization.
We left Emily and Celia sitting
in a coffee shop.
Please watch carefully, and notice
how Emily is tempted to alter the truth.
You pioneer together.
I know, and that’s why I’m concerned.
Concern is good,
but
is there just a little bit of envy in there?
I thought you would understand.
I think I understand your feelings.
But not about Haley?
I haven’t seen all her posts.
There’s nothing immoral, is there?
No.
Good. That’s not like her.
Now, if
it’s a case of her being more careful
how she comes across,
that’s another matter.
Why don’t you talk to her?
Maybe.
Emily, you are a beautiful, spiritual sister.
You know,
for years,
I had a bad habit
of comparing myself to others.
My own insecurity hurt me
and my closest friends.
So you don’t think
I should’ve spoken to Celia?
No, I’m glad you asked Celia about it
—someone you trust.
What did she say?
Well, she definitely understands how I feel.
Good.
And about Haley’s posts?
Well, she hasn’t seen
everything she has out there.
Hmm.
She did say that Haley
needs to be more careful
how she comes across.
What did she suggest?
That I should tell her
that she needs to stop,
but I’m too worked up.
Look,
if Celia agrees
that Haley is doing something she shouldn’t,
you should talk to her.
You’ll find the right time.
Thanks for understanding.
I’m hungry.
Can you say the prayer?
Sure.
Jehovah, we’d like to praise you
for your generosity and kindness . . .
Did you notice how Emily just heard
what she wanted to hear?
In talking to her husband, Jake,
she painted an incomplete picture.
She did not relay that Celia had no opinion
about the social media posts of Haley.
And contrary to what she told her husband,
Celia did not encourage her
to tell Haley to stop.
Our brothers and sisters deserve the truth.
But Emily didn’t relay that, did she?
She was dishonest, something that can have
a damaging effect, as we will see later.
Jehovah wants us to put away
this peace wrecker, dishonesty.
He wants us to always be truthful,
even in small matters.
Therefore, how do we put away dishonesty?
Let us please turn to Ephesians chapter 4.
Here the apostle Paul reminds us
of a reason to be honest.
This is Ephesians chapter 4,
and we want to read verse 25:
“Therefore, now that you
have put away deceit,
“each one of you speak truth
with his neighbor,
because we are members
belonging to one another.”
Did you notice why we put away deceit
and speak truth with one another?
Paul says: “Because we are
members belonging to one another.”
In other words, Paul reminds us of the fact
that dishonesty affects others
—our brothers and our relationship with them.
So, then, knowing this,
how can we put away dishonesty?
The answer is:
By considering the consequences
of dishonesty and honesty.
This will help us to do the right thing.
Now, what are the consequences of dishonesty?
As we’ve seen in the case of Laban and Jacob,
it will disrupt the peace with others.
And since Jehovah hates dishonesty,
it will also disrupt our peace with Jehovah.
On the other hand,
what are the consequences of honesty?
While dishonesty might seem in the moment
to be the easier way out,
in the long run,
honesty will enable us to have good friends.
They want to enjoy peace as well,
and therefore they are also searching
for someone they can trust.
And in this way, we are
like ‘body members belonging to one another.’
And even more important,
we will enjoy a good conscience
and “peace with God.”
Let us, therefore, put away
this peace wrecker (dishonesty)
by sticking to the truth
even in small things.
Dear brothers and sisters, Jehovah knows
that for us imperfect humans
this is not always easy.
Yet, he promises to help us
and to bless every step we take
to build trust and peace
and not to wreck it.
Brother Patrick LaFranca,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“‘Put Away’ Peace Wreckers—Harmful Gossip.”